[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
So, would like to live forever?
What does that really mean?
It means that you can live
healthy past 150 years old,
but healthy is the key.
And that is exactly what
Bill Andrews is committed to.
He is a molecular
biologist and athlete
and the CEO of Sierra Sciences.
Bill is committed
to curing aging,
and he is pushing the envelope.
He wants to extend
human longevity
using regenerative medicine.
And his motto is "live
forever or die trying."
Bill is joining us
today with his wife,
Molly Sheridan, also
an ultra-marathoner who
is on this journey with Bill
for life, however long that is.
Welcome.
>>BILL ANDREWS: Thank you.
>>MOLLY SHERIDAN: Thank you.
>>LISA: So glad to
have you guys here.
And your energy
level is so high,
I just have to ask you,
just right off the bat,
about the ultra-marathons.
Is that something that you
do for joy and you love it?
Do you absolutely love
ultra-marathoning, Bill?
>>ANDREWS: I actually consider
them restful vacations.
>>LISA: A 100 mile race?
>>ANDREWS: It's like, yeah.
What an escape from it all.
They're fun.
If I don't do one
like once a month,
I go through withdrawals.
>>LISA: Once a month?
And then, do you
train in the meantime?
So you run a 100 mile
race, without sleeping.
>>ANDREWS: Right.
>>LISA: For-- how long
does that take you?
>>ANDREWS: Well, I've never
broken 20 hours, but typically
between 20 and 24 hours.
>>LISA: Wow!
>>ANDREWS: And
sometimes, depending
on the course, a lot longer.
>>LISA: And then what about you?
When did you get into this?
>>SHERIDAN: I started running,
actually, when I was 48.
So I was a late bloomer.
>>LISA: Oh, that's right.
>>SHERIDAN: And
so I just thought
it was fascinating,
reading about people
that went distance.
And I just thought
it was amazing.
And I think it's just
a grand adventure.
>>LISA: Well, you are both in
this wonderful movie called
"The Immortalists."
And you are one of the
stars of the film, where
you are committed to living
forever or dying trying.
What gives you that type
of motivation, Bill?
>>ANDREWS: I just love living.
It's-- I mean, I've even--
It all started, I
guess, when I was 10.
My father said, you
know, Bill, since you're
so interested in science and
medicine, when you grow up,
you should find
a cure for aging.
And I had always,
even at 10, I wanted
to be there when we find
life on other planets.
And the future was always
so interesting to me.
And I realized that, you
know, I might miss the future,
because I might die of
old age before then.
And so I thought,
first things first,
I'm going to have to
cure aging, and then
I'm going to do all
the other things.
And I decided that
when I was 10.
And all through high school,
college, everything, everybody
knew me as somebody who was
determined of try to figure out
the aging process
and how to stop it.
And I'm still doing it.
>>LISA: Well, let's talk
about the science behind this.
Now can you tell us
about the discovery that
was made about the telomeres
and the scientific Nobel
Prize that was won around that?
Why was that such a
significant discovery?
>>ANDREWS: Well, OK.
So in the, let's say,
late 1970s, early 1980s,
it was discovered that
telomeres get shorter as we age.
And there seemed to be a strong
correlation between the length
of your telomeres
and your overall age.
But more importantly, the
length of your telomeres
and your overall health.
People started noticing that
there were some people that
were really sick
at young ages had
short telomeres
like old people do.
And so there was a big
correlation determined,
and people start speculating
that maybe this had something
to do with our
health and our aging.
This was Blackburn, Carol
Greider and Jack Szostak
won the Nobel Prize in Medicine
for elucidating all this
and showing the
correlations and stuff.
And they discovered an
activity in a single cell
pond scum organism,
called Tetrahymena, that
seemed to keep the
telomeres from shortening.
Telomeres are like the
tips of our chromosomes.
You think of a chromosome
like a shoelace.
The caps on your shoelaces
are the telomeres
of our chromosomes.
And so when the caps on
our shoelaces get short,
our shoelaces fall apart.
That's the same
thing that happens
when the telomeres on our
chromosomes get short.
Our chromosomes fall apart.
And so we discovered that
this telomere shortening
occurs in every cell of our body
except our reproductive cells.
And if it did happen in
our reproductive cells,
then our children would be born
older than we, or-- yeah, older
with shorter
telomeres than we are.
And so there had to be something
they kept them from, ah,
shortening.
And we discovered this
enzyme called telomerase.
And that enzyme keeps the
telomeres from shortening.
>>LISA: I'm just
curious, but what
is the telomeres'
function in the cell?
They're outside of
the cells, right?
So then, how do they cause
the cell to regenerate?
>>ANDREWS: The telomeres
are inside the cells.
>>LISA: Oh, they're inside, OK.
>>ANDREWS: They're
inside the nucleus
at certain phases
of the cell cycle.
But the-- they're-- like
the shoelace analogy,
they're actually part
of the chromosome.
They're actually just
the tips the chromosome,
which are found
inside your cells.
>>LISA: Oh, I see.
OK.
I see.
And so the shorter
that those get,
then the cell starts to
shrivel and shrink and not
replicate in a healthy way.
>>ANDREWS: And it's
been speculated
for close to 20 years that
somehow the telomeres fold back
onto the chromosomes to
turn genes on and off,
or effect their
expression levels.
And now it's been
actually shown,
just in the last few
months, that that's actually
what is happening.
That the telomeres fold back.
And when the
telomeres get shorter,
they're less able to
reach over to those genes.
>>LISA: Mm, hm.
That is fascinating.
So that's been a new
and recent discovery,
even since the film
came out, basically?
>>ANDREWS: The discovery
that-- the proof-- I mean,
it was speculated,
because it was like, well,
how else could it be happening?
But the proof kind of just
came a few months ago, yes,
after the film was finished.
>>LISA: So really,
the cure to aging
does have to do with
telomeres and telomerase.
It really-- I mean, there's
many different solutions,
but that's a big one, isn't it?
>>ANDREWS: I think
there's no way we're ever
going to see a cure for
aging unless we figure out
how to solve the telomere
shortening problem.
And once we solve the telomere
shorting problem, that
doesn't mean we've cured
aging; it means that we, like,
maybe I'll give myself
another 30 to 40 years of life
to be able to
figure out how to--
>>LISA: Healthy.
>>ANDREWS: Yeah,
healthy life, too.
Figure out how to cure the next
problem that causes us to age.
I think of them like
sticks of dynamite
that are burning inside of us.
And which stick of dynamite
has the shortest fuse,
in my opinion, is the telomeres
on the tips of our chromosomes.
But that doesn't mean there's
other sticks of dynamite that
aren't burning out there.
>>LISA: Right.
Well, my opinion is
the healthy part.
And you, Molly, would love
to live a ripe age healthy
and not fall prey to the
degenerative diseases that
are out there.
But what does your mindset
have to do with that?
Do you really believe
that that's possible?
>>SHERIDAN: Oh, absolutely.
And I think we just need to
get people in front of Bill.
Because it's so interesting,
the science out there.
And most of us who don't
have a science background,
or aren't up to
date, don't realize
that it's a real science
and what they have learned.
And the future is promising,
you know, for health.
And people, instead of
getting older and more ill,
staying healthier longer.
I think that's the key.
>>LISA: Because aging is
just broken down cells
not regenerating or regenerating
the wrong way, right?
And that-- a disease, I
mean, disease is, right?
Is that right?
>>ANDREWS: They're broken down.
They-- yeah.
There's a phase
when the cells get
really old that
they do break down.
OK.
But I think that's long after
the aging really has occurred.
The aging has actually
occurred by the changes
in gene expression.
We've been able, at least when
Petri-- human cells in Petri
dishes show that when we
re-lengthen the telomeres,
the genes actually go back
to the exact same expression
patterns that they had
when they were young.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ANDREWS: Which means the
cells didn't really break down.
They just changed.
And that change is reversible.
>>LISA: So let's talk about
detoxification, though.
Because, doesn't
that have to do,
if you are going to
regenerate the cell,
you want to regenerate it
without the toxins in it,
right?
>>ANDREWS: Yes.
Well, the toxins are going to
go away by other mechanisms
anyway.
And one of the things,
like with Aubrey de Grey,
he's very right when he
says that we accumulate
a lot of junk in our cells
as our cells get older.
I believe there's a chance
that if we can lengthen
the telomeres,
that junk is going
to disappear all on its own.
Simply by the fact that when the
junk will quit being produced,
and as the cells divide,
the junk gets diluted out,
and eventually
there's no more junk.
I'm hoping that's
what's going to happen,
but, of course, we
won't know until we
have a way of preventing the
telomeres from shortening.
>>LISA: Or the natural
detoxification mechanism
inside the cell will just
be enhanced and work better,
one would hope.
>>ANDREWS: Exactly.
Let's hope that's the way, yes.
>>LISA: OK.
So also, you had said,
both, I believe, in the film
or at some point, that
the telomeres start
shortening after we're born.
So that's an
automatic-- is that--
>>ANDREWS: No, they start
shortening from the day
you're conceived.
>>LISA: Oh that!
>>ANDREWS: I think, as long
as there's still telomerase
being produced-- the earliest
stage that I've heard that you
can see telomeres shortening is
at the eight cell embryo stage.
>>LISA: My goodness.
>>ANDREWS: You can
still see telomeres.
When you go to 16 cells,
apparently, there's
still-- there's some shortening
that you can observe there.
OK.
And maybe there's
one cell that's
not having any
shortening, and that cell
ends up becoming your
reproductive cells.
>>LISA: OK.
>>ANDREWS: But the other
cells all start shortening.
So you're aging from
the day you're born,
or the day you're conceived,
but you don't really
start showing the signs
of aging until much,
much later after you're born.
>>LISA: You've got
to be growing also?
The cells have to be
in growth and decline
at a different rate, right?
>>ANDREWS: Well, there's
development and there's aging.
Those are actually
two different things.
>>LISA: OK.
>>ANDREWS: So what
we're talking about
is controlling the
aging without really
controlling the development.
So I would imagine if we
took a 65-year-old person,
let's say we find a way to
reverse that person's aging,
that person would
go back to about 24.
Because I think most
developmental scientists
say that we pretty much quit
developing when we're 24.
We're not going to
reverse development, just
reverse the aging.
>>LISA: So I mean,
what I hear you
talking about is not necessarily
living to be 1,000 years old.
You're really talking about
improving the quality of life
while you're on
the planet, and not
falling prey to the
degenerative diseases, right?
That's really what
you're talking about?
>>ANDREWS: Exactly, exactly.
>>LISA: OK.
So the whole living
to 1,000 is just
a sexy way of bringing
people into a topic.
But you're really talking
about health, in my opinion.
>>ANDREWS: And who knows?
We might live to be 1,000.
It's like, what happens
if we, as Terry Grossman
talks about, the
bridges that we cross?
And his famous
saying of, like, we
got to figure out a way to live
long enough to live forever.
Because if we can figure out
ways of continually stopping
each of the processes
that cause us to aging--
cause us to age,
then eventually,
we're going to reach
a point where we're
going to be solving the
problems faster than we age.
And maybe we just keep
on going and going.
Of course, we're always going
to be run over by trucks.
We're always going
to fall off cliffs.
We're always going to have
disputes, family disputes,
and shoot each other, you know?
>>LISA: Hopefully not.
>>ANDREWS: Not in
our relationship.
>>LISA: Not in
your relationship.
So that brings up the
topic of living forever.
If you were to live
forever, you chose--
you found your life partner.
And this is truly
for life, right?
>>ANDREWS: Oh, absolutely, yes.
>>SHERIDAN: Well, I
think that's the key.
I mean, honestly, when
you're with somebody
that you love and adore,
I mean, why wouldn't you
want to be with them as
long as you possibly can?
So I think it--
>>LISA: How long have
you guys know each other?
>>SHERIDAN: Nine years?
>>ANDREWS: Nine years, yeah.
>>LISA: Nice.
And you've been married four?
>>ANDREWS: No, a
little over two.
Two and a half.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness!
Newlyweds.
>>SHERIDAN: I know, we are.
>>LISA: Oh, wonderful.
Well, you got a long way to go.
We're going to take a look at
the movie "the Immortalists."
This is a clip from
the movie where
Bill is explaining the science.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>2011 should go down in
history as a very important year
because it's the very first
year that humans have ever
been able to reverse aging
in any type of animal
on the planet.
The research lab in
Harvard has actually
been able to reverse
aging in mice.
And these mice
actually became younger
using telomere
lengthening technology.
So what is a telomere?
A human being is made up
of 100 trillion cells.
And then inside of each of these
cells are found chromosomes.
A chromosome is like
a long shoelace.
At the very tips of our
shoelaces are found the caps.
Those are the telomeres.
When the caps of the shoelaces
get worn away to nothing,
the shoelace starts
falling apart.
Well, the same thing happens
with the chromosomes.
Telomeres shorten every
time a cell divides.
And so when a
telomere gets shorter,
it's almost like
a clock ticking.
The cell divides, it ticks once.
The cell divides
again, it ticks again.
It ticks again and it ticks
again and it ticks again.
And as a result, human
cells know how old they are.
There's two words,
telomere and telomerase.
Telomerase is the enzyme
that lengthens the telomere.
When a telomere gets shorter,
the clock ticks once,
telomerase pushes it back.
It ticks again,
Similar to what Harvard
did with the mice,
we're trying to figure out a
way to turn on telomerase in all
of our cells.
So we've been screening
hundreds of thousands
of synthetic chemicals,
looking for anything
that would turn the
telomerase gene on.
Then the human cell would
then become immortal.
Lots of people told us we were
completely wasting our time,
but we found our very first
hit on the 57,684th chemical we
screened.
10 to 15 years in the future,
it will be a prescription drug
that doctors can prescribe
to just about anybody.
My main reason for
doing this research is
to extend my own
lifespan, my friends'
and families' lifespans.
And we are so close.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Truly, how far away
are we from this technology?
In the movie you
say we're so close.
But how close is close?
>>ANDREWS: Well, what
we found is that--
and most of it,
what we discovered,
is through gene
therapy techniques.
If we produce a little
bit of telomerase,
the telomeres will get
a little bit longer
and stay a little bit longer.
If we produce more
telomerase, they'll
get even a little bit longer
than that and stay that length.
And when we get the
telomerase to a certain level,
then the telomeres actually
get longer than-- then
they just keep getting
longer, and that's
when we've reversed human aging.
And right now, we have found
chemicals and natural products
that will produce enough
telomerase in a cell
without using gene
therapy techniques,
it will produce enough
telomerase inside of a cell
to be about 16% of the
amount of telomerase
we need to totally
stop and reverse aging.
And we went from, like, I
would say 4% or 5% up to 16%
in just a few months
of doing what's
called medicinal chemistry.
And we were pretty--
all excited.
We thought, well,
in less than a year,
we're going to be at
that 100-- that amount.
And we lost our funding at the
time, because lots of people
did in 2008 from
the economic crisis.
As soon as we can get our
funding back, we can get going,
and we can be back up to having
a telomerase inducer that
will produce enough telomerase
inside of human cells
to reverse aging in
less than a year.
>>LISA: So why did
you choose to do
the plant-based, or
natural products,
as opposed to a pharmaceutical
lab-based product?
>>ANDREWS: Well, if the
plant-based stuff works,
we can get product into people's
hands and into their mouses
faster.
Yeah.
Because the plant extracts
that we've been testing
have already been
approved by the FDA.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>ANDREWS: They have a
classification called GRAS,
G-R-A-S, which stands for
Generally Regarded as Safe.
So the FDA has already
approved these things.
So they can get on
the market as fast.
Now we've already tested
over 10,000 different plant
extracts, and we
haven't found anything--
we found a lot of them that
actually-- I think 39 of them,
from 10,000 different plants--
we found 39 of them that
will induce an
expression of telomerase.
But not enough to
actually reverse aging.
They may slow down the
aging process a little bit,
not actually reverse
the aging process.
We've tested over 300,000
different chemicals,
and we have found 900
different chemicals
that will do the same thing.
And these chemicals right now
are showing a lot more potency
in inducing telomerase
than the natural products.
But we're going to take those
through clinical studies.
And it will take a long
time before people actually
can actually start using them.
>>LISA: So but
they're, at some point
into the long
distant future, there
could be a pharmaceutical
drug that could reduce aging.
>>ANDREWS: Yeah.
Right.
>>LISA: But in the immediate,
there is maybe-- you said,
a pond scum?
>>ANDREWS: Oh!
>>LISA: Should we just go start
licking the bottom of ponds?
>>ANDREWS: Well, there is
a pond scum organism that
does not age, and it's
called Tetrahymena.
And it was-- they discovered,
Nobel Prize winners,
discovered that it had an
enzyme activity in it that
kept the telomeres
from shortening.
So we're trying to
learn from that example.
We found the same kind
of enzyme activity
and completely characterized
it in humans now,
and we're just now trying
to teach human cells how
to produce this
enzyme themselves.
>>LISA: So you're training it
within your lab environment.
So now, if you don't
receive the funding,
how long can you sustain?
Or do you have a plan B?
>>ANDREWS: Well, our
plan A was to continue
looking for investors.
But after a while, I
decided that maybe the plan
B is a better approach.
And that's to just start getting
some products on the market
right now.
My company is not a marketing
company, not a production
company; we just do research.
But we made it known that
if some other marketing
company wants to put some
products on the market,
we will license some of
the discoveries we made.
So we've done that.
Product B is an example of that.
So is some skin
creams that are being
sold in Australia
called One Truth 818,
and in New Zealand
called Defy Time.
These are things that are
on the market right now.
There's other products coming
along, pet products, hair care
products, a bunch of things that
are going to, in my opinion,
these things are not
going to cure aging.
They might slow
aging down a bit.
They might make-- In
the clinical studies,
the skin has been looking like
it's getting some age reversal.
>>LISA: With the creams
or with the Product B?
>>ANDREWS: With the creams.
>>LISA: Hm!
>>ANDREWS: But my way
of looking at this
is that this is bringing
in royalties to my company
so that we can do research.
And so every penny of the
royalties that we're getting
is going directly into research.
And we haven't gotten enough to
actually get us back on track,
but I predict that easily
by the-- by mid-2015,
we're going to be
back on track and have
a real drug-- and hopefully a
natural product-- by the middle
of 2016 that we can then
start testing in humans.
Now, Molly, what
is it that you do?
Are you also in the
anti-aging world?
Or--
>>SHERIDAN: I own a company
called Desert Sky Adventures.
And I'm on the health and
fitness side of what Bill does.
So I encourage people
to walk and run
for health and adventure.
So they kind of go hand-in-hand
to keep from getting older.
Mine is all about promoting
moving, moving through space.
>>LISA: Uh, huh!
And now, how did you guys meet?
I have to ask.
>>SHERIDAN: We were at a race.
>>LISA: Of course.
>>SHERIDAN: Of course.
>>LISA: There's a
very unique community,
that of the 100 miler,
100 plus, right?
>>SHERIDAN: Actually, yeah.
And it wasn't.
We were just at Lake Tahoe.
There was a whole bunch of
different events going on,
and we bumped into each
other in the hallway.
And, kind of--
>>LISA: And found that you
had this thing in common
called 100 mile plus race.
>>SHERIDAN: It kind of
grew from there, yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Your story is great,
that you went to a doctor
when you started to
run and they told you
that you shouldn't
be running, right?
>>SHERIDAN: My girlfriend
invited me to run a marathon.
I said, ew, how awful.
That sounds terrible.
I had never had a
background in running.
And she encouraged me, and
told me, oh, my gosh, we're
going to fun.
I go, how do you have fun and
marathon in the same sentence?
I couldn't even imagine.
So she kind of
hooked me into this.
And I decided to start training.
I hurt my foot, because
I didn't have a coach,
didn't have proper guidance,
I didn't know anything
about running, or really
had no background.
So when I went to the
doctor, he said, oh, my gosh.
You have a stress fracture.
What are you doing?
I go, oh!
I'm training for this marathon.
And he's going, how old are you?
And I said, wow, that's
a weird question.
I'm 48.
And he goes, oh!
You're too old to be running.
Pick a different sport.
And I was like, it was the
first time anybody ever told
me I was too old.
I was shocked.
I knew that advice wasn't right.
And so actually, that
started the whole ball
rolling with, oh, my gosh.
Now I really want
to do this marathon,
because I'm not too old.
I properly started training.
I never had another injury.
I took a picture myself
crossing the finish line
and sent it to him,
and said, please
don't tell people that
they're too old to be running.
>>LISA: Good for you.
>>SHERIDAN: It was awesome.
So that started the
whole company thing
and wanting to
encourage every age.
>>LISA: That started
your company?
Oh, I see.
>>SHERIDAN: Yes, it did.
>>LISA: And then, do you do
marathons and different runs
for causes?
>>SHERIDAN: I do 5Ks,
10Ks, half marathons.
Everything that we
do in our company
is associated with a
charitable organization.
We raise funds for all sorts of
organizations in our community.
And it's not about distance.
I totally get that not everybody
would want to run 100 miles.
So we really want
people to walk and run
for a mile, two miles, 5K.
We want the whole
world to be moving.
>>LISA: Well, it's
a great metaphor
for what it is that
you guys talk about.
Because you're going
the long distance.
You are-- you're in
it for the long haul,
in many ways-- in your
marriage, in your marathons,
and in your science.
We're going to take a look here
at Bill talking about the ultra
marathon.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>Curing aging is a race.
This is the biggest
race of all time.
I have a pretty
incredible girlfriend.
She and I travel all over the
world doing races together.
She's in her 50's.
>>I actually didn't
start running
until I was 48 years old.
I didn't know anything
about running;
I just was out there all
by myself, just training,
and I got a stress fracture.
So when I went to the
doctor, the doctor said,
you are too old to be
running a marathon.
And I was, like, horrified.
At 48, that's not old.
When I crossed the finish line,
I sent him a picture of me
and said, don't tell
people that they can't run
and that they can't exercise.
>>She actually just became
the first American woman
to complete a race
in the Himalayas.
And she ran for 58
hours, straight hours,
to complete that race.
>>It's on the only
rode in the Himalayas
that's open two months
out of the year.
Bill and I, we
attempted it in 2010.
Nobody had ever attempted it.
So the race starts,
we're high-tailing it
up the mountain.
Later in the race, I had heard
that Bill took a pit-stop.
You know, he wasn't
feeling great.
So the whole day, I am looking
behind me going, where is Bill.
The race director shows up and
says Bill is at the hospital.
We have to fly him out.
So at that point, I--
I abandoned the race.
He was in terrible shape.
It played in my head about
how bad it could get,
but you know, [SIGH] I--
I can't even go there.
I really can't.
It just would be horrible.
You're going to
like your present.
>>Oh, yeah?
>>Yeah.
>>Let me see.
>>All right, I have
to explain it first.
>>OK.
I purchased the naming
rights of a star.
The name of the star is
called Telomere Love.
>>Wow!
When I got into my early
20s, I found myself
getting engaged five times.
In every single case, it took
me a day or two of depression
to think, oh, no.
This is not part of
my-- my overall plan.
This is going to
interfere with my plan;
it's not going to
make things happen.
And in all cases, I went and
cancelled the engagement.
Well, I got-- I got
a surprise for you.
>>OK.
>>I got you a present.
>>You got me a present?
>>Yes.
>>Was it from work?
>>I've gone 39 years without
ever proposing to anybody,
until just last August.
I proposed to Molly.
And so we're engaged now.
And I'm shocked, because I-- two
days later, I didn't cancel it.
>>It's a heart.
But what-- what is that?
>>You don't recognize it?
>>Is that petrified wood?
>>Yes.
[GASP]
>>Thank you.
You did really good.
Thanks, that's so sweet.
We have our own life planned.
After aging is cured, we're
going to race the planet.
I guess we're going to the
moon, according to Bill,
because he's got a race up
there that he's worked on.
He's adorable.
It cracks me up,
because that's Bill.
I just go, OK, go for it, baby.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: In terms of the
inflammation that you
guys might have from
stress fractures,
or from running, or
for anything like that,
how could what you do you
deal with inflammation?
Because it's a leading
cause of disease
and of pain in the
body as we age.
Do you have any
solutions for that?
Or is what you're working on
going to affect or help with
anti-inflammation?
>>ANDREWS: Well, I think there's
plenty of research showing
that when your
telomeres get shorter,
you have an increased chance
of getting inflammation,
doing the same things
as somebody else
with longer telomeres that
wouldn't get the inflammation.
But, you know, going
back to running,
I've found that if you are
a consistent runner and run
all the time, you
rarely get inflammation.
And I believe that
inflammation is
one of the major causes of
injuries in running, and stuff.
It's like, a typical person
who runs maybe once every two
weeks, and then runs a marathon
typically does pretty well.
But then when they get
finished celebrating that day,
and the next day
they wake up, they
find they're stiff as a board.
And that stiffness
is all the swelling
from all the immune cells
migrate into the joints,
because it thinks the joints are
under some attack by something.
And that's when the
injuries start occurring.
And so I think that
running all the time
trains your body
to say, hey, ignore
what's going on in the joints.
It's not some foreign
invader attacking you.
The body gets used to it.
And as a result,
when Molly and I
go out and run 100 miles,
usually the next day,
we can go out and run
another 100 miles.
Well, maybe never 100
miles the next day.
But at least a 10K.
>>LISA: It's just what the
body can adapt to, right?
>>ANDREWS: Yeah.
>>LISA: You just train the
body and it adapts, ultimately.
>>SHERIDAN: Exactly.
>>LISA: So inflammation,
what about heart disease?
You had, at a certain
time in your life,
high cholesterol, right?
>>ANDREWS: Oh, yeah.
And well, I had plaque buildup
in my arteries and stuff
like that.
And I still do.
They just haven't gotten
any worse in the last,
like, 35 years.
>>LISA: With all the running
you do, it's just genetic?
>>ANDREWS: Yeah, it's
definitely genetic.
And believe me, I've
had my whole genome
analyzed by 23 and me.
So I know the genes
that are-- that I have,
which I wish I didn't have.
But it's, as in the
documentary, "The Immortalist,"
it's pointed out that
I have these things.
But I don't have
the other markers.
I just have a few of markers.
Specifically, a gene called LPa.
And that gives you high
risk of heart disease,
but only if you have
the other markers, too.
So I have a little
bit of plaque buildup.
But I think the
exercise and et cetera
helps decrease the chances.
And I think the
supplements that I take
and et cetera also help decrease
the chances of that happening.
>>LISA: What about memory
loss and Alzheimer's?
And I know that your
father's in the movie,
and he is particularly afflicted
by those types of illnesses.
>>ANDREWS: Yes.
>>LISA: Can what you're
talking about here
with the telomerase
lengthening affect the memory?
>>ANDREWS: I hope so.
There's definitely a correlation
and a lot of literature
showing that people that have
different forms of dementia,
including Alzheimer's,
have shorter telomeres
in their blood cells,
maybe in their glial cells,
Schwann cells, astrocyte cells.
The last three cells
are cells in the brain.
But what I was
most excited about
was when Dr. Ron DePinho
at Harvard and his team
took old mice and
lengthened their telomeres
using a gene therapy
type of trick.
The mice actually got younger.
And certain aspects
of brain function,
like sense of smell and
stuff like that, came back.
And so it might be that we might
actually be able to reverse
brain disorders,
including Alzheimer's.
>>LISA: Well, what
about genetics, though?
What if you are
genetically predisposed
to Alzheimer's and Parkinson's?
Can the telomeres affect
the genetic predisposition?
>>ANDREWS: Yes.
Well, anything that shows up
more likely when you get older
should be able to reverse,
whether it's by genetics
or not.
In the case of Alzheimer's,
there are genes,
particularly a
gene called ApoE 4.
People that have the ApoE 4 gene
are at higher risk of getting
Alzheimer's.
Fortunately, I don't
have that gene.
>>LISA: But doesn't that
have to get turned on
by the environment?
By certain
environmental signals?
>>ANDREWS: Well, the
gene's already there.
OK.
And it is already turned on.
>>LISA: Through genetics.
>>ANDREWS: It makes-- well,
it gets turned on just
because it's turned on
all the time, anyway.
But it takes a long time
of accumulated damage
to actually cause the effects
of dementia and stuff.
So if you have-- ApoE 4 is one
of the subunits of cholesterol.
And there's other
ApoE 4-- or ApoE forms
that can take its place.
But if you have the
ApoE 4 form of ApoE,
then you have a higher
risk of Alzheimer's.
But even that, we think, is
reversible with lengthening
telomeres.
>>LISA: Amazing.
>>ANDREWS: We hope it is.
>>LISA: Well, there's so much
more that you can discover.
And there's so much
science coming out
these days around
this particular topic.
You were on the cover
of many magazines.
And do you find,
in your community,
that there are a lot more
scientific studies being
done now on anti-aging
and brain function
than there ever has been?
>>ANDREWS: Absolutely.
>>LISA: That's exciting.
>>ANDREWS: Even as Leonard
Hayflick pointed out
in the documentary, used to
be it was professional suicide
to be saying you were
looking at aging.
Now it's the exact opposite.
Now people are
actually recognizing
that there's real
science going on.
It's not just quacks
and charlatans anymore.
>>LISA: What about some
of the, as he calls it
in the movie, the
Nano Tech Revolution?
And some of these different
types of molecular science
that's being used?
This little robot that can go
in and actually repair a cell.
Does that exist today?
>>ANDREWS: Almost.
I mean, there are some--
I'm familiar with a few
of the scientists that
are working on that.
They've been working on
it for 30 plus years.
But there is some small
robots that you can actually
watch function in
electron microscopes.
But they got a ways to go
yet before they can actually
get in and start.
I think at least
within 50 years,
we're going to find that our
body's invaded intentionally
with these nanobots that
are going to do everything.
They're going to be going
up and down our blood
vessels cleaning up plaque.
They're going to be
going inside of our cells
and lengthening our telomeres.
>>LISA: You mean they're
going to be injected?
Or we're going to drinking
them through our water supply?
>>ANDREWS: I don't know.
Maybe we'll be inhaling
them, breathing them.
>>LISA: Oh, my god!
>>ANDREWS: I don't know.
I'm very excited about
that possibility.
I think that's going
to be really, really
great when that happens.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
How do you build a
robot that you can only
see in an electron microscope?
The technology is phenomenal.
Oh, my goodness.
>>ANDREWS: They're doing it.
They're doing it.
That's not my area of expertise.
I just don't know how to do it.
But I'm very impressed with the
scientists that are doing it.
I know a lot of people that
actually invested some money
into that research, too, because
they really believe in it, too.
>>LISA: Right.
And also cryogenics and
beyond, to be able to actually
preserve the body, so
that 150 years from now,
when this has all
been revolutionized,
you can wake up again
and go, oh great!
>>ANDREWS: I think cryogenics
is one of the things
that we really need
to work on the most
because that's our last resort.
OK.
So if me and the
other scientists,
like Aubrey de Grey and
others, don't come up
with a cure for aging
in time, hopefully
somebody 100 years
from now will.
And then we can be
thawed out and take
advantage of their cures.
>>LISA: Well, that's actually
an interesting point because it
brings up the whole
idea of reincarnation
and the spiritual aspects
of aging, as we do,
and the gracefulness of
aging, and the wisdom that
comes from being older.
And then fading on into,
maybe, the afterlife,
as many religions say,
that you come back, right?
But as you clearly pointed out,
you don't remember anything.
This is a flaw in the system.
[LAUGHING]
>>ANDREWS: No, reincarnaters,
reincarnation people,
see, really do some
science there to make it
so you can remember.
>>LISA: Well, I mean, you have
a very big purpose for living.
But do you believe
in the afterlife?
I'm going to ask you, Molly.
Do you believe?
>>SHERIDAN: Oh,
absolutely, I do.
I believe that there's
a higher being,
and I think that we all have
a purpose on the planet.
And yes, absolutely.
>>LISA: And Bill?
>>ANDREWS: I would say I
believe, but I don't know.
>>LISA: OK, said like
a true scientist.
>>ANDREWS: Yes.
>>LISA: Enough said.
All right, we're going to take
another look at the movie,
here, a clip from
"The Immortalist."
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>I think running
this race is going
to help find me some funding.
Especially when
people start seeing
what this particular
60-year-old can do.
It runs 138 miles,
and it's non-stop,
and it goes over two
18,000 foot peaks.
>>To any normal
person, you couldn't
advise this as a
sensible thing to do.
It's crazy.
I mean, to most people,
a marathon is crazy.
These guys are doing seven or
eight marathons at 18,000 feet.
It's insane.
A couple of minor conditions
that you'll face up there.
The air is a lot thinner.
When you start to
up to altitude,
it can cause part of
your brain, ultimately,
to pop through out of your
skull, which, ultimately,
leads to death.
>>You guys all runners?
You probably don't listen
to doctors very much.
>>We're both in agreement.
This is mental.
>>Yeah.
>>Three, two, one!
Woo!
>>If I don't finish this race,
I'm not going to cure aging,
either.
But don't count on either one
of those things happening,
because I'm gonna cure
aging or die trying.
And I'm also going to finish
this race or die trying.
[TICKING]
Yeah!
And now the blister has spread
out to there, it looks like.
Mm.
And it hurts.
I can't even walk
around, I'm just so weak.
Do you know, this might
be just chest pain.
OK, I don't know what a
heart attack feels like.
>>I'll get the doctor.
Relax for a minute.
>>OK.
There's no way I'm
getting back in this race.
[BABY CRYING]
I'm sorry.
Mucks up everything.
[WIND BLOWING]
[HEAVY BREATHING]
I really don't know what does
happen when a person dies.
I would guess that our brain
just quits functioning,
and then we go
into non-existence.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: In terms
of living forever,
can we address some of
the social ramifications
of overpopulation and our
overcrowded planet as it is?
What do you think about that?
I mean, I'm sure you've answered
this question several times.
>>ANDREWS: I'm going to
make a mess out of things.
That's a fact.
It's going to cause
a lot of problems.
I just think we
have problems now.
A friend of mine,
Dr. Greg Fey actually
pointed out an example of
how everything we're doing
is going to be OK and the
fact we have problems now
and we'll have
problems in the future,
but the problems we have now
far outweigh the problems we're
going to have in the future.
And so what we're going to
do is still a good thing.
OK.
We're going to make-- we're
going to have less problems.
But the big problems
that I look at
are, one, is over population.
But two is like, how will the
young ever compete for jobs
if the old people don't
get feeble and quit working
and make the jobs available
for the younger people?
So there's going to be
these kinds of problems
when we actually have
a cure for aging.
But I believe that if,
like, 100 years after we
come up with the cure for aging,
and these problems all still
existed, if we have
some kind of big vote
to see if everybody wants
to return to the old ways
and ban the cure for aging,
nobody's going to want that.
Everybody's going to
like the cure for aging.
We're just going to have
to figure out some way else
to solve these problems.
Now that is not my
area of expertise.
I'm going to create
the troubles,
but I'm not going to be
there to solve the troubles.
>>LISA: You're starting
the conversation.
>>ANDREWS: Somebody else it
going to have to do that.
Yes.
>>LISA: This is true.
In this screening-- we were
at the screening of the movie
last night-- and we polled
the audience after the movie
and asked collectively
how many people
would want to live forever.
And the majority
was that they would.
There was a minority that
said they hated the topic,
and they didn't want
to have anything
to do with living forever.
And it had usually to do
with religious and social
ramifications of living forever.
But there's-- you're
starting the conversation.
You're the catalyst
for the conversation.
But I have to fairly ask
you, are you afraid to die?
>>ANDREWS: No, not at all.
It's never been a fear.
It's more I love living.
I think I said that earlier.
I love living.
I want to live as long as
I can because I like it.
I don't want to be unhealthy.
I do fear the idea
that someday I'm
going to have to have a
caregiver taking care of me
all the time.
>>LISA: As you're having
to do with your father.
>>ANDREWS: Yes.
As, especially, my
father's wife is
having to do with him right now.
And I feel really sorry for her.
And we do know
that people that do
spend a lot of time taking
care of others, especially
with Alzheimer's,
they end up having
shorter telomeres because
of all the stress.
>>LISA: Stress, yes.
>>SHERIDAN: And may I?
I just want to say that
I lost my dad last year.
And my dad wasn't ready to die.
He was a very healthy
93-year-old, up until the end.
And then he had emphysema and
that got him at the very end.
But you know, we lose so
many wonderful people,
brilliant scientists,
medical doctors,
people that we
lose that we could
use a lot longer on the planet
to help solve problems, too.
And our loved ones.
So there are such a huge-- it
is a thought provoking subject.
And it is interesting
that we all
need to kind of consider
it and think about that.
>>LISA: Well, I
mean, that brings up
a great point about divine will.
I mean, there is--
many of us believe
that there's purpose in life
and that our plan is predestined
in this world, and those that
have accidents, or injuries,
or aneurysms, or whatever it is,
it's part of the divine plan,
and it's your lesson.
It's the karma, karma
of the world, right?
Which I find really interesting
because you can't prove that.
And of course, that's a
non-scientific conversation,
which I'm kind of having
with myself right now.
>>SHERIDAN: Well, maybe karma
will just change a little bit,
so we have a few
more years to hang
on to our destiny and our karma.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SHERIDAN: If aging is--
>>LISA: But if somebody did
have something like an aneurysm,
you know, could your
science reverse the effects
of the damage that something
like that would cause?
So it cuts off blood supply,
it kills brain cells.
>>ANDREWS: What we're doing
can't bring dead cells back
to life.
>>LISA: OK.
>>ANDREWS: But there
are stem cells.
And the stem cell field is, I
think, a very exciting field.
The stem cell field, the way
I look at it, especially when
you're doing homologous
stem cell-- where you're
taking cells from your own
body and putting them back
into you-- is really a way
of just providing your body
with cells that
have long telomeres.
And so I'm looking at a way of
just adding longer telomeres
to the cells you
already have, instead
of adding new
cells to your body.
But in the case of where you
are-- you've had cell damage
and the cells have died,
then, I think, stem
cells is the only solution
and the best solution
to do to try to
rejuvenate the tissue.
And that's what, like,
regenerative medicine is all
about, is trying to
rejuvenate or recreate
the tissues that have been
destroyed or gotten weakened.
>>LISA: Hm!
Are there longer telomeres in
specific cells in the body,
like, do fat cells have longer
telomeres than brain cells?
>>ANDREWS: It's all a
function of how many times
has a cell divided?
And so some cells-- you know,
I'm going to guess here,
because we haven't actually
gone and measured these things,
but I would imagine that
cells of the heart, nerve
cells, those typically have
probably longer telomeres
because they don't divide.
They are terminally
differentiated.
They were created a long time
ago, and they never divide.
And so the telomeres don't get
shorter, except by other means.
But probably not
as drastically as,
actually, cell division does.
But now, in the case
of those kind of cells,
I'll say the nerve
cell, for instance,
they need what I call
caregiver cells, OK,
in order to function.
They are surrounded
by glia cells.
And one particular one
is called Schwann cells
that actually produce
a protein called
myelin that coats
the nerve cells.
And so those cells,
they do divide.
OK, these glia
and Schwann cells,
they do-- a Schwann cells
is a type of glia cell.
They do divide.
And so as a result, their
telomeres do get shorter.
And I think that we're
going to find out
that one of the causes
of a lot of dementia,
including multiple
sclerosis, things like that,
are due to the fact that the
Schwann cells quit producing
myelin when the
telomeres get shorter.
And so I'm hoping-- of
course, I keep saying this,
because we've got a long way
to go on our research-- I'm
hoping that we're going to find
out that by keeping telomeres
long might actually reverse some
of the effects of some diseases
that people don't
even know about yet,
like multiple sclerosis.
>>LISA: That's exactly
what I was referring to.
Now are there--
there are supplements
in the market that are--
that prove-- or not prove,
but they claim to thicken
the myelin sheath.
There is the oyster cell,
or the shark cartilage,
or the jelly-- the whatever.
Have you found any of those
to actually be effective?
Jellyfish extract?
>>ANDREWS: Well, to
be honest with you,
I only just learned about those
just now when you told me.
I didn't know there
were supplements
that would improve--
>>LISA: I've done
many shows on it.
>>ANDREWS: I'm very
focused on the telomeres.
But boy, I'm going
to do some homework
and learn about
these supplements.
Maybe I should
start taking some.
>>LISA: Well, the anti-aging
industry, even depicted
in the film, tends to
have a lot of charlatans.
And it also has some
very thin research
behind some of
these supplements.
But the minute you say the
fountain of youth, people rush.
It's been that way for--
throughout history,
throughout ancient history.
>>ANDREWS: Can I make some--
give everybody advice?
OK?
>>LISA: OK.
>>ANDREWS: And
that's, to get away
from actually listening
to all the charlatans
and quacks and stuff like
that, and all the propaganda
and the focus groups.
>>LISA: Marketing.
>>ANDREWS: Marketing
and stuff like that,
from telling the wrong
stories, to find out
what's really going
on, go to PubMed.
OK.
P-u-b-m-e-d.
That's a database of
scientifically peer-reviewed
journal articles.
And look in that.
And some of them will be
scientific, but some of them
will be non-scientific enough
for people to understand them.
But actually see what
the studies are really
saying about different things.
And so if you find a supplement
that people are claiming
does this or that,
and you go to PubMed,
and you can't even find a
study on that supplement,
don't believe it.
The study hasn't been done.
Because it would be
published in that journal,
or in that database
of scientifically
peer-reviewed journal articles.
>>LISA: So if I look
up shark cartilage,
I could see if there's
any studies there
that proves that it
grows bone marrow, right?
>>ANDREWS: And you might find
one that says it doesn't, one
says it does.
And so you have to, like, find a
case of where 10 papers says it
does, and one says it doesn't.
Then if you find that,
then believe it, it works.
>>LISA: That's great advice.
So you can do our
own research, which
I think is very empowering.
And it's pubmed.com.
That's terrific.
So you two are clearly in
this wonderful honeymoon
phase of your
lives, which I love.
And in the film,
you're so sweet when
you say, I'm going to be married
forever and ever and ever.
>>SHERIDAN: Think about that.
>>LISA: Think about that.
How do you feel about that?
Expand on that a
little bit more.
>>SHERIDAN: Well, I just
feel like our relationship
is a grand adventure.
And we just make it that way, so
it's fun and it's interesting.
And we're always-- I
think we're respectful
of each other's
individual independence.
We're both really
independent, but it works.
And so it's fun.
>>LISA: Has this movie coming
out changed your lives?
I mean, you've been on the road
for three months now, right?
>>SHERIDAN: It hasn't for me.
>>ANDREWS: Our
lives were already
changed before
this film came out.
>>SHERIDAN: Yeah, we
were kind of busy.
>>ANDREWS: Yeah, busy
with our missions.
>>SHERIDAN: But I
don't think it will--
it doesn't make a
difference to me,
I mean, as far as
a change for us.
I think it's-- I'm really
excited that it's letting
people know about anti-aging
and the real science.
I always keep saying,
Bill, you need
to get out in front
of more people
so they understand
what's happening.
And it's so important.
>>LISA: Have you
had any responses
from people about wanting
to contribute, fund,
starting that conversation?
Has it helped?
>>ANDREWS: Yeah, I
mean, we get a lot
of people interested
in investing.
But it's rare when actually
somebody actually gets
to the point of actually
saying, here's the investment.
But we're at a point
now where I think
it's too late to actually
come with investors,
because we've now spent so much
energy into getting products
to get royalties to
generate our own funding.
>>LISA: So that's great.
And now what about you?
Have you had
anybody approach you
about being a
relationship counselor?
>>SHERIDAN: Not yet.
>>LISA: Because you
seem to want to be--
>>SHERIDAN: They can call
me and I'll let them know.
>>LISA: -- forever.
>>SHERIDAN: Forever, though.
>>LISA: Yeah, I
mean, I don't know
if you've even thought about the
fact of growing into old age.
I guess we need to get rid
of that conversation now.
But growing into,
what did you say?
Accellerated years together.
Do you ever stop working?
Do you ever stop with the cause?
Do you ever retire?
>>SHERIDAN: No.
I think if you have a passion,
especially, you know ,
I see Bill's passion.
He will always have his
passions just burning inside.
>>LISA: 80 more years, Bill?
>>ANDREWS: You
know, there's always
going to be something to cure.
>>LISA: This is true.
>>ANDREWS: And I want
to make life happier
for everybody, that's
including myself.
>>LISA: And you, Molly?
>>SHERIDAN: And
me, I want everyone
on the planet to be
moving-- walking, running,
swim, bike, hike, move!
It helps you
mentally, physically.
I think it's all-- the
all-inclusive wonder
treatment for anti-aging.
>>LISA: But is
there a point where
you both want to actually stop
and enjoy what you've done?
>>SHERIDAN: Well, we do.
>>ANDREWS: We do enjoy.
>>SHERIDAN: Yeah.
>>ANDREWS: No this is--
I've got the funnest job
in the whole world.
>>SHERIDAN: Me, too.
I feel like every day's a joy.
>>LISA: So it's not
work, it's play.
>>SHERIDAN: It is.
>>ANDREWS: It is, yeah.
Very much.
>>LISA: That was really cute.
So in terms of
what's next for you,
are you enjoying the
documentary and all the exposure
it's getting?
Or is there another
one on the way?
Or what are you thinking?
>>ANDREWS: I'm enjoying
it, but I'm actually
getting quite anxious to
get back to the lab bench
and do some science.
Because I don't like--
I'm not a person
that likes talking about
what I'm going to do.
I'm somebody that likes
to get the work done.
And that's just--
it's getting closer.
I believe that by mid-2015, as
I said earlier, we're actually--
I'm going to be able to
get my lab coat back on
and just focus on
all that stuff.
And if somebody else wants to
come and make a documentary,
I'm going to say, not at home.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
Yes.
When you're gone from the lab,
do have scientists, though,
that are still
working on testing
these various different
types of extracts?
>>ANDREWS: Yes, I do.
And I just want to get
in there with them.
>>LISA: Any new discoveries?
>>ANDREWS: I would say
the biggest discoveries
we've had have been discoveries
that we've licensed out
of the company,
because we haven't been
able to do a lot
research ourselves.
We do some research,
but not enough.
But we did license one
of our best chemicals
out to a lab in New Zealand.
And they did some medicinal
chemistry and stuff,
and proved the potency of
it and the safety of it,
and everything like that.
So that's, I think, the
biggest exciting discovery.
>>LISA: And that's
the skin cream?
>>ANDREWS: That's
the chemical that you
put into the skin cream.
And they did clinical
studies with that.
And it was amazing
what they saw.
And especially with the safety.
Completely safer than
ginger, ginseng, Resveratrol,
things like that, which
are considered very safe.
>>LISA: But it's a topical?
>>ANDREWS: Yeah,
as a top-- well,
even when added to human
cells on a Petri dish,
it would be safer than those.
But it was also done on human
skin, and in clinical studies,
where actually 100, I think, 100
women, 50 placebos, 50 tested,
were actually tested.
And there was
absolutely no signs
of any kind of like
negative side effects.
>>LISA: Hm.
Interesting.
And the Product B, what's
in the Product B that--
is it a proprietary
blend of something?
Is it several things that
allows the lengthening
of the telomeres to be halted?
>>ANDREWS: Well, I can't really
say that Product B lengthens
telomeres, because the
clinical studies haven't
been completed yet.
All I can say is that it's a
mixture of natural products
that there's been 37 of
them that we discovered.
And not all 37 are in there.
I think probably only
the strongest ones.
But these are natural
products that, when
we add to human cells
grown in a Petri dish,
it actually causes the
production of telomerase
inside those cells.
And I'm looking forward to
the clinical studies being
completed, which are under
way through Isogenics.
>>LISA: About how much
longer would those take?
>>ANDREWS: It can take--
sometimes clinical studies
take four years or
more, longer to do.
But I'm hoping that
they'll get done quickly.
It's a struggle
because the techniques
of measuring telomere lengths
are still in its infancy, too.
There's one company that I think
is doing exceptionally well
at this-- a company called
Life Length in Spain.
And so we're trying to do
some of the clinical studies
through them.
But still, it's not
an easy thing to do.
>>LISA: It's just great
to know that this exists.
It give us hope, if
anything, and mostly
towards living healthier and
reversing a lot of illnesses
that really cause a
poor quality of life.
So keep doing what you're doing.
Thank you so much for
imparting your knowledge.
And Molly, thank you so much
for bringing a lot of joy
to the conversation.
>>SHERIDAN: Thank you, Lisa.
It's been great.
>>ANDREWS: Thank you.
>>LISA: So much appreciated.
Yes.
And if you'd like to watch a
replay of my interview here,
or if you'd like to share
it with your friends,
go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]